---
layout: post
title: "Chess : My journey to 1800"
author: Bharathi Ramana Joshi
categories: chess
tags: [chess]
image:
---

I recently hit [1802](https://lichess.org/@/The_Mockingbird/perf/rapid) on
rapid, my highest so far. I'm at a point where I actually realize how little I
know and understand, and how profound the top players' comprehension of the game
is. Nevertheless, getting here involved notable efforts, which prompts me to
reminisce upon which of these efforts were effective and other tips.

1. Taking a break : it might seem ironic that the first thing I write here is to
   stop playing, but it is quite important to know when to recuperate energy.
   For me, some signs of fatigue include making moves hoping to be right without
   calculating the top continuations (if you play a move, you'll have to
   calculate down that line anyway so might as well calculate before playing)
   and starting a new game immediately without analyzing how the previous game
   went (improvement is unfeasible you keep repeating the same mistakes).
   Stopping playing for the day usually helps, but sometimes taking a few days
   off is also good after a long binge playing session.
2. Stop playing blitz and bullet : these shorter formats are not only ill
   suited, but on the contrary can be harmful when trying to improve. These are
   best utilized for practising openings and traps, otherwise usually the player
   who forces their opponent into deep calculations (not the [Tal
   kind](https://www.google.com/search?q=deep+dark+forest+tal&tbm=isch&ved=2ahUKEwiynsr9herwAhVbnUsFHdy3A1EQ2-cCegQIABAA&oq=deep+dark+forest+tal&gs_lcp=CgNpbWcQAzIGCAAQCBAeOgIIADoECAAQGFDiMFiJNGChNWgAcAB4AIABiwGIAf8DkgEDMC40mAEAoAEBqgELZ3dzLXdpei1pbWfAAQE&sclient=img&ei=NamvYPKvNtu6rtoP3O-OiAU&bih=648&biw=1352#imgrc=4vAFJblIf8UgWM))
   wins by flagging in these short formats. Furthermore, playing too much of
   these habituates making moves fast without enough calculation, resulting in
   bad moves even when playing longer formats. Also, perhaps surprisingly, deep
   opening knowledge is useless at this level -- just not making obvious
   mistakes in opening should be fine. If one indeed wants to study, that time
   is better spent studying standard endgames instead, since that can convert
   drawing and losing to winning and drawing endgames respectively.
3. Solving puzzles : this improves a plethora of important skills -- calculating
   lines till the end, evaluating positions, and spotting tactics, to name a
   few. Furthermore, this also increases patience, since solving a puzzle
   usually requires thinking and concentrating for a few minutes at least. This
   comes in handy when playing longer formats and discourages making moves
   without thinking. I found Susan Polgar's *Chess Tactics for Champions* very
   helpful in this regard, just working through the first 3-4 chapters boosted
   my rating by over a hundred points.
4. Going over games : after finishing a game, it is quite important to go over
   it to spot mistakes and missed opportunities before starting a new game,
   otherwise the mistakes will be repeated. Lichess has a useful "learn from
   your mistakes" feature for this, where you have to actually spot the right
   moves in positions where you blundered.

That's it! Just doing this consistently should get one to 1800 in a couple of
months. Looking back, I myself didn't follow most of this advice -- for example,
I played way [too many](https://lichess.org/@/The_Mockingbird/perf/bullet) short
format games, kept playing even when I was obviously too tired, and got
impatient and made random moves instead of thinking while solving puzzles. So
please, don't make the same mistakes I did and hope you can improve your game!
